in the old days on YouTube there was a
type of video called
book versus show or books to show
comparison and those videos have
obviously he disappeared because at one
point the TV show the TV adaptation Game
of Thrones they ran out of books to work
with and the TV show kept going but in
this case in the context of discussing
the conclusion of the grand overarching
plot of the relationship between the
White Walkers a humanity on the
continent of Westeros I think it is
worthwhile to take a moment and go back
and consider what the book set out for
us what it is we're supposed to have
known and understood about who the White
Walkers were and why they invaded the
realms of men as it's put in the show
george RR martin has said many times and
interviews and it's obvious from his
work he is not interested in creating an
evil Dark Lord a villain who is evil for
the sake of being evil now it's
interesting to point out mmm he doesn't
perfectly live up to his own standards
in the books you can actually pick out
examples of individual people and even
individual cultures out in Essos there
are a few that seemed to be evil for the
sake of being evil he doesn't always
live up to his own standards but it's
very clear in the book that quite a lot
of time was taken so that we could
sympathize the motivations even of the
great others even of the White Walkers
coming from beyond the wall now if
you've only watched the TV show and
haven't read the books you will remember
that in the first three years quite a
lot of time and effort was put into
showing you there is a man called
Craster
Craster lives at a special place called
Craster's keep north of the wall and the
most shocking thing about Craster is not
that he gives his infant children to the
others is not that he gives his infant
sons his newborn boys to this you know
miraculous and magical different species
with blue skin what's amazing about it
is that the leader of the light Nights
Watch knows and permits it and doesn't
regard it
a bad thing so the Nights Watch has
known about this and has always known
and then sort of dot-dot-dot the rest is
left up to us to fill in the blanks
we are told that many many centuries ago
so many centuries ago that nobody knows
how many years it was perhaps thousands
of years um there was a peace treaty
between the others and human beings and
they put up this wall now in the books
it only gives credit to the human side
for creating the ice wall but of the two
parties who created this treaty you tell
me which side is more likely to have the
means to create an enormous barrier made
out of ice it seems very likely the two
sides cooperated or even that the bulk
of the construction is creating the huge
mass of ice was actually done by the
others and then maybe human beings put
the staircases and castles and other
fixings and details into the ice wall
but some at the end of the long night
the war between humans and the others
there was a pact there was a treaty now
this again implicitly confirmed
something were explicitly shown where at
the beginning of the books which is that
the others have language they speak the
reason they're not they're not mindless
zombies themselves right not in the
books they have motivations and the the
pact the peace treaty created obviously
wasn't just to separate the two
civilizations separate the others from
humanity the others remain dependent on
humanity because humanity had to provide
them with a certain number of babies per
year right and the Nights Watch is
always known about this and it's always
participated in it and so on and so
forth right so one of the first moments
of direct conflict between the others in
the Nights Watch is when zombie rises up
within Castle black
to kill jail or Marmont the leader of
the Nights Watch and Jon Snow White's
the zombie on fire and the zombie bursts
into flames
by the way in tonight's episode
inexplicably the zombie seemed a lot
less flammable than they were in earlier
seasons we don't have any explanation
for that they seem to become stronger
faster
less less susceptible to fire with each
passing season so they're really an
unstoppable superhuman force at this
point as opposed to being shambling and
perhaps somewhat weak somewhat enfeebled
by death but anyway
this is a mirror detail
so um why what's what's happened well
you know the Nights Watch and the realms
of men it seems they have not been
living up to their side of the bargain
with the exception of Craster handing
his sons over to the great others it
seems that you know the old traditions
of the Nights Watch have been forgotten
or neglected or failed them it seems
that the others are in a position of
having to come south because humans
haven't been keeping up their side of
the treaty now the real plot twist for
readers of the books what was the plot
twist that was revealed in the show and
has not been revealed in the books yet
was who or what created this bizarre
situation in the first place why was
there a kind of asymmetrical symbiosis
between humans and the great others well
it turns out that there's yet another
species of you know bipeds but who are
not quite human living on the continent
the original indigenous people the
continent are the children of the forest
and the children of the forest were
being pushed to extinction by the
incoming colonization of the continent
going from east to west by human beings
now all of this of course is not so
different from the history of New Mexico
which is where george RR martin lives
there's a you know obvious question to
what extent many of these contexts many
of these concepts including the Great
Wall and the persecution of indigenous
people to extinction and so on and so
forth to what extent some of these
things the conflict being the first man
and the later settlers and then the the
children of forests being the real
indigenous people you wonder to what
extent that reflects political and
ethical concerns that surround george RR
martin in his own society and the
history of the preceding centuries in
his own society but with that aside the
plot twist we face
in the show that hasn't been revealed in
the books yet is that the reason why the
great others exist is that they were
created like a sort of biological weapon
to wipe out humanity or push back
humanity so that the children the forest
could continue to survive right but
that's not what happened right at the
end of the great the long night at the
end of the last war instead what
happened was a treaty whereby the
children of the forest and the others
together both would only live north of
the ice wall human beings would live
south as I say the others continued to
depend on human beings
so look people who are saying this
episode is a masterpiece well if what
you signed up for was meaningless
spectacle for the sake of meaningless
spectacle if what you signed up for was
a battle between good and evil life and
death where the side representing evil
is just evil for the sake of being evil
they just want death for the sake of
death they just want to but that's not
what I signed up for I signed up for
something that's really politically
sophisticated meaningful has some kind
of philosophical content to it as well I
signed up to be it you know one of those
rare junctions in history where pop
culture and great literature and you
know politics and philosophy all
happened to come together at the same
point the same time in the same story
that's what the books have offered us or
at least that's the books have promised
us the books are not yet finished but
it's impossible to believe that this is
the direction the books are going in if
this really was the conclusion the books
were working towards and again simply
ask yourself why did all that stuff
happen with Craster at Craster's keep
why did it matter so much to reveal to
us that you know the others require
human babies to continue their culture
and what sense would it make for the
others to try to kill all of humanity
they themselves are human and they rely
on humans to give birth to and raise
children and give them offer them in a
religious ceremony to the others so the
others then raise those human babies as
members their own culture
their own civilization and then of
course is the question of what was the
agenda of the children of the forest in
the TV show the children forest just
disappeared conveniently at a certain
point but presumably the children the
forest want their land back or at least
10% of their land back or they'd like to
survive - and none of that's ever dealt
with another kind of large-scale
overarching question here who is the red
God or what is the red God
it's just ridiculous the position we're
left in here partly because the way
Stannis is storyline ended but um
apparently we're supposed to just
believe the red God is literally a God
no nothing else is revealed there and
yet this God who's capable of kind of
coordinating information across the
whole globe and moving people into
position and doing all these things this
God sent one person sent one magician
however you want to put it to help out
it is about not ten not five so this red
God controls enormous temples in Essos
as has been revealed even on the TV show
and we know this in the books too of
course if it's God this God that there's
nothing else or there's no plot twist
this God isn't someone like bran you
know telepathically make lighting people
this this God isn't someone like Marwyn
the mage Marwan the major is a person
only in the books this isn't this case
where I'm like The Wizard of Oz in the
end somebody has revealed being behind
the curtain or it's all revealed to have
been a you know religious enthusiasm
that wasn't based on no no no no
apparently we sort of know this the
supernatural gods are real and exist and
manipulate history and circumstances in
a phobia position and yet are so weak
and powerless that the best they could
do that the most impact this religion of
the red God could have was having one
person in the right place at the right
time not two not five not an army no and
apparently also the God now the red God
has no interest in all the things that
Stannis Baratheon was fighting for he
has no interest in burning down the
idols of the seven is no interest in
spreading his own religion in Westeros
all of those agendas all of those
teams that again were set up in the
first three season the show quite
seriously we get the sense right at the
beginning of the TV show hey guess what
a major site in this war is a side
that's trying to convert this continent
to a new religion that wants to burn the
statues if the old religion that wants
to burn all the people who believe in
the old illusion nope all that's
forgotten just brotherhood among men and
this huge enormous convoluted plot
including Stannis's army and the
complete destruction of standards arm
completely disappeared that'll happen to
put one person at Winterfell in the
rightful its third that not five not ten
I don't think george RR martin is
capable of a lapse in the quality of his
writing that bad and I do not think
george RR martin is capable of
preventing us a story that consists of
life and hope triumphing over death and
evil and characters and motivations who
are evil simply for the sake of being
evil so look guys in some ways you may
regard this episode as a masterpiece as
a triumph of special effects and action
film photography that's how you feel
about it fine on another level this
episode cements or is the final
disappointment if the final letdown in
that the TV show has simply lost all
interest in completing any of the
storylines any of the plots any of the
thematic philosophical questions that
were first asked in seasons 1 2 & 3